---
author: "Peiling Jiang"
date: "2021-05-11"
title: "b5: A Web-Based Visual Programming Language"
type: posts
bookToc: true
---

<style>
    figcaption, #header-links {
        font-size: 0.9rem;
    }

    #header-links a {
        color: black;
        padding: 0.25rem 0.45rem;
        text-decoration: none;
        white-space: nowrap;
    }

    #header-links a:hover {
        color: #fff;
        background: #333;
        border-radius: 3px;
    }

    #header-links span {
        color: #ccc;
        user-select: none;
    }

    .draw {
        color: #f35c87 !important;
    }

    .draw:hover {
        color: #fff !important;
        background: #f35c87 !important;
    }
</style>

<div id="header-links">
    <a href="/capstone/peiling2021b5.pdf"><b>PDF</b></a>
    <span>|</span>
    <a href="https://github.com/peilingjiang/b5"  target="blank" noreferrer noopener><b>GitHub</b></a>
    <span>|</span>
    <a class="draw" href="https://b5editor.app/" target="blank" noreferrer noopener><b>b5 Editor</b></a>
    <span>|</span>
    <a href="https://tisch.nyu.edu/research/bios/student-research-fund-bios/student-research-21/peiling-jiang" target="blank" noreferrer noopener><b>Tisch Creative Research Fund Awardee</b></a>
</div>

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/main.png" id="fig:main" alt="The interface of b5 web editor, version 0.2.2." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The interface of b5 web editor, version 0.2.2.</figcaption>
</figure>

**How will the next generation learn creative coding? Do they have to look up hundreds of pages of documentation and take classes? Do they have to write redundant code for features already well accomplished due to lack of information? Do they have to learn English? b5 rethinks the future of creative coding in terms of clarity, accessibility, and customizability in a world that increasingly emphasizes remote collaboration, internationalization, and personalized learning. b5 is a web-based visual programming language for learning and fast prototyping for people with minimal to no programming experience, leveraging novel features compared to other visual programming languages, including (1) position-based sequential execution (blocks are executed in order based on their positions in the code canvas), (2) customized blocks (users can use the predefined blocks and the graphical interface to design and construct new blocks), and (3) effect blocks (block that affects other code blocks based on their contextual relationship instead of wire connection). b5 makes programming easy to learn and encourages programmers to explore and try, while more analysis is needed to assess its usability and long-term effects when used as the learning platform for beginners.**

## Introduction

Creative programming, using computational thinking to create expressive
art and design projects instead of functional computer programs
(Wikipedia contributors 2021a), is becoming a heated topic across the
fields. Its history can be traced back to the 1960s (Monoskop 2012),
while the recent development of personal computers and web technology
and the growing body of open-source software, learning resources, and
community make it even more appealing, powerful, and accessible.
Transforming from an avant-garde artistic tradition to a common practice
in the era of “ubiquitous computing,” its purpose, practitioners, and
deliverables have changed - the goal is no longer only serving as a
medium for artistic exploration and might be educational or auxiliary;
the creators come from both fields of art and technology, who worked as
designers, programmers, artists, etc., and may also be students in
various levels of learning programs; the final display form can be
graphics, installations (physical computing), films, projections, sound
art, etc. Many programming languages, scripting tools, and visual
programming interfaces emerge to meet the diverse needs of different
groups of people.

Visual programming languages and interfaces gain their popularity among
educators, designers, and beginners through this process. Benefited from
the development of computer processing power and graphics capabilities,
such tools become more accessible, powerful, and user-friendly than
before (Boshernitsan and Downes 2004; Burnett and McIntyre 1995). Using
icons, images, pictures as a metaphor of functions and variables, which
are common concepts in traditional text-based programming, people code
by clicking, dragging, and dropping in a canvas of these graphical
representations, instead of typing characters and words in the text
editor.

Here, we propose b5, a web-based visual programming language that is
designed to address several ignored problems and needs in the field, as
well as proposing new features either as an extension or alternative
solutions compared to the existing tools.

## Related Work

proposed Fabrik, a visual programming language leveraging “wires” and
“nodes” as the basic components to create interactive projects. However,
limited by the human-computer interaction devices and graphics power
back then, the interface looks primitive and barely usable. The Scratch
language and its programming environment were proposed by and soon
become one of the most popular tools for teaching and practicing
programming in schools of different levels ranging from kindergarten to
pre-college. The use of it in teaching shows positive results - students
who learned Scratch could then spend less time to learn new topics, have
fewer difficulties, and obtain higher levels of understanding when
learning more advanced text-based programming languages like Python and
C (Armoni, Meerbaum-Salant, and Ben-Ari 2015), indicating positive
cognitive-level assistance being provided by the interface so that
students can better learn and comprehend concepts in programming in
general. also showed that learning Scratch helped students to perform
better in later coding challenges with a higher intrinsic motivation to
learn novel concepts. The visual programming languages not only
outperform traditional programming languages in terms of educational
purposes but also accessibility (learning curve and hardness of
understanding) and can be specifically designed to better serve in
particular domains and aid people with minimal or no coding experience
to leverage for computational tasks. For example, Grasshopper (Robert
McNeel and associates 2007), a plugin for Rhinoceros 3D, were designed
to help complete computational industrial and architecture design. The
target users of it are designers and architects who are supposed to have
no programming experience at all. Another example is Max (Cycling ’74 2020) designed for composer, performers, and artists to create music and
multimedia projects. , on the other hand, pushed the boundary of visual
programming further into the physical world where people can use real
LEGO bricks as building blocks to design their programs.

Because of different purposes, target users, and generalization
capabilities compared to text-based programming languages, various
visual programming languages and the platforms to create and edit them
emerge in fields where there is a computation need, result in tons of
different choices (Wikipedia contributors 2021b) and outnumbers the
text-based ones.

## Design

Visual programming languages can be divided into two subcategories:
node-based, e.g., Grasshopper (Robert McNeel and associates 2007), where
nodes are separated and connected by wires in-between, and the execution
order of the nodes is solely based on the connection between them, from
root to edge; and block-based, e.g., Scratch (Maloney et al. 2010),
where blocks of lines of code are placed together sequentially, and the
execution order of the blocks is thus determined by the contextual
position of the block. The latter is more closely related to the
traditional text-based languages with a strong emphasis on sequence.

b5, however, tries to take advantage of both designs - using a
node-based layout, while still emphasizing the execution order by
constraining the position of the “nodes” (or in the context of b5,
blocks) into the code canvas with a grid layout. The blocks then run
sequentially from left to right, in each line of the canvas, and line by
line from top to bottom. In the context of b5, we call each individual
code block a "block," and its ports that send outputs or receive inputs
"nodes."

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/sequence.png" id="fig:sequence" alt="The basic structure of a b5 program. b5 uses a node-based design where each code block is separate and connected by the wires in-between for the data to flow from the upper blocks to the lower ones. However, unlike other node-based interfaces, b5 uses a grid layout to constrain the position of the blocks in the code canvas (the canvas where all the code blocks are placed) for users to define the only possible execution order of all code blocks. In this figure, the circle block is taking outputs from the x node of canvas center block into its x node and from the output of number slider block into its y node. However, with the sequential execution design (from left to right, from top to bottom), the order that the blocks in this code canvas run is canvas center, number slider, no stroke, fill, and circle, even though the style blocks do not have direct wire connections with the circle block." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The basic structure of a b5 program. b5 uses a node-based design where each code block is separate and connected by the wires in-between for the data to flow from the upper blocks to the lower ones. However, unlike other node-based interfaces, b5 uses a grid layout to constrain the position of the blocks in the code canvas (the canvas where all the code blocks are placed) for users to define the only possible execution order of all code blocks. In this figure, the <em>circle</em> block is taking outputs from the <em>x</em> node of <em>canvas center</em> block into its <em>x</em> node and from the output of <em>number slider</em> block into its <em>y</em> node. However, with the sequential execution design (from left to right, from top to bottom), the order that the blocks in this code canvas run is <em>canvas center</em>, <em>number slider</em>, <em>no stroke</em>, <em>fill</em>, and <em>circle</em>, even though the style blocks do not have direct wire connections with the <em>circle</em> block.</figcaption>
</figure>

Since all the blocks are sequence-sensitive and always aware of their
positions in relates to the others, a novel characteristic is introduced
for the _effect blocks_. Effect blocks can affect other blocks around
based on their position relationships, e.g., all the following blocks in
the code canvas or all the other blocks in the same line, instead of the
wire connections. This feature is inspired by HTML canvas rendering
context whose style settings can affect the following shapes drawn on
the canvas. In
figure <a href="#fig:sequence" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:sequence">1</a>,
the _fill_ block is an effect block that sets the filling color for the
following shapes cascadingly, till another _fill_ block is encountered.
When an effect block is selected and focused, the background grid cells
will also change color to reflect its effective range, unlike when
working with text-based canvas rendering context mentioned above, the
underlying status of the drawing context always remains hidden to the
programmer and needs to be inferred from the actual behavior of the
program. This extra layer of information is supposed to help programmers
gain a deeper understanding of their programs and debug or reconstruct
them more easily.

We created a web-based programming interface to help users create, edit,
and read b5 code files. As shown in
figure <a href="#fig:interface" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:interface">2</a>,
the whole system consists of two major components: a floating viewer
window and an editor interface. The viewer window shows the live
rendering of the program and can help snapshot or record the canvas for
sharing. The editor, the programming interface, can be further divided
into _Factory_ and _Playground_ sections. Users can construct their
customized _variable_, _function_, and _object_ blocks (See
section <a href="#sec:cus" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:cus">3.3</a>.)
in the panels of the Factory section, which can be later used in the
code canvas in Playground. Playground has only one mega code canvas that
behaves similarly to the _draw_ loop of p5.js (Processing Foundation 2013) and runs 60 times per second by default.

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/interface.png" id="fig:interface" alt="The web-based programming interface of b5. The environment has a floating viewer window and an editor interface, which consists of two sections, Factory and Playground." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The web-based programming interface of b5. The environment has a floating viewer window and an editor interface, which consists of two sections, <em>Factory</em> and <em>Playground</em>.</figcaption>
</figure>

The following subsections will elaborate how other design choices were
made to enhance b5’s clarity, accessibility (e.g., understandability),
and customizability.

### Clarity

Besides the sequence-sensitive design in b5 that forces people to learn
and think more about flow, which would benefit them when programming in
more advanced languages, several other features make the interface of b5
clear and easily comprehensible.

Like many other visual programming languages, b5 is colorful, and each
of the block types has its color. The color is consistent across the
system to the connecting nodes and other buttons to further strengthen
users’ muscle memory and could help increase their ability to recognize
the overall structure of the program. Just as shown in
figure <a href="#fig:color" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:color">3</a>,
_draw_ blocks, e.g., and _canvas_, are pink, _default_ function blocks,
e.g., _constrain_ and _map_, are gray, etc. Besides different block
types, different blocks also have different designs, i.e. forms and
structures, to best serve their particular functionalities - some may
only take inputs and outputs, some have a slider or input box component
to interact with, and some organize all the information into one line
for simplicity.

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/colors.png" id="fig:color" alt="Different colors of different block types." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Different colors of different block types.</figcaption>
</figure>

The blocks’ wires and input/output nodes are also designed to precisely
indicate their position, identity, and connecting status. The nodes are
white by default and can switch to different colors (See
figure <a href="#fig:nodes" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:nodes">4</a>.)
when connecting to other blocks as the input or output hooks, indicating
the data flowing through them. It may also turn alarming red, along with
the connecting wire, when there is an error related to the current
connection, e.g., the input node expects a number input while a shape is
fed.

<!-- <figure>
<img src="/capstone/nodes.png" id="fig:nodes" alt="Positions, identities, and connecting status of the nodes in a code block." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Positions, identities, and connecting status of the nodes in a code block.</figcaption>
</figure> -->

{{< photo src="/capstone/nodes.png" id="fig:nodes" alt="Positions, identities, and connecting status of the nodes in a code block." width="25%" figcaption="Positions, identities, and connecting status of the nodes in a code block." >}}

Instead of waiting for compilation and the code changes reflected on the
canvas, b5 enables users to modify scripts on the fly and any changes
made, additions, deletions, or parameter tweaks, will be instantly
visible on the side of the code. Thanks to this live rendering feature,
users are encouraged to make changes and explore different possibilities
of the code and, as a result, gain a deeper understanding of the
structure and functionalities of each code block through the effortless
tries. Like some other visual programming languages that also features
live rendering, b5 could encourage learning code by exploration and help
form certain programming habits - that they are no longer afraid of
trying and tweaking the code - which would benefit the learners later
when they learn more advanced and harder topics (Meerbaum-Salant,
Armoni, and Ben-Ari 2011).

To conclude, features including sequential specific, colorful blocks,
status-sensitive nodes and wires, and live rendering help make b5 and
its web-based programming environment clear and reduce ambiguity that
might confuse new users when they first see and use the system with
minimal guidance and teaching.

### Accessibility

Another major design concern is accessibility in terms of the learning
curve and the hardness of understanding, especially for people with
limited educational resources.

All the code documentation (what a particular predefined function does
and how to use it) is directly embedded in its component, whether it’s a
block, a node, or some other interactive code components, e.g., an input
box or a slider. One can intuitively look it up by hovering the mouse on
the corresponding component, instead of opening another browser window
and search for the component. The documentation popup includes all the
information one would need to understand the functionality and use cases
of a block, including the full name that better depicts the identity, a
detailed description explaining its function and default values (for
nodes), and the type (e.g., block or node) and category (e.g., _draw_ or
_object_ block) of this component.

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/documentation.jpg" id="fig:documentation" alt="Embedded documentation for the blocks, nodes, and other components. When hovering on a code block, the full name, description, and categorization will show. The feature also applies to other components in the code canvas, including the nodes, the input boxes, and more." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Embedded documentation for the blocks, nodes, and other components. When hovering on a code block, the full name, description, and categorization will show. The feature also applies to other components in the code canvas, including the nodes, the input boxes, and more.</figcaption>
</figure>

Since the text is just labels instead of the commands themselves, the
blocks, node names, and even embedded documentation can be easily
translated into another language to increase the accessibility of the
system. Scratch has been translated into more than 70 different
languages (Wikipedia contributors 2007), and b5 is expected to have the
same flexibility for better internationalization compared to text-based
languages. People from over the world would then be able to learn
computation without learning an additional language as a prerequisite.

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/language.png" id="fig:language" alt="The same camera block translated into English, Chinese, French, and Japanese. Both the block name and node names are translated." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The same <em>camera</em> block translated into English, Chinese, French, and Japanese. Both the block name and node names are translated.</figcaption>
</figure>

Finally, b5 editor, the whole programming environment, is web-based and
can be loaded and ready to work swiftly, and the only requirement is a
stable internet connection. The whole process of creating, editing, and
reading b5 programs does not require any additional installation. There
is also no hardware or software requirement - one can even easily use it
on a tablet or mobile device. The b5 definition file used to store the
type, location, and connection of the blocks is in JSON (JavaScript
Object Notation) format and can be opened and read by almost all modern
operating systems and web browsers. No private-domain extensions are
associated with the files. Thanks to the nature of b5 and its coding
platform, the system is highly accessible and straightforward to work
with.

The easily accessible embedded code documentation, the ability to be
multilingual, and the web-based nature all help make b5 and its
programming interface highly accessible and easy to work with, even
without a trained teacher for this novel system, without learning
English, and without any software purchase or installation.

### Customizability

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/preview.png" id="fig:preview" alt="The interface for designing and constructing customized blocks. A code canvas and the rendering of the customized block." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The interface for designing and constructing customized blocks. A code canvas and the rendering of the customized block.</figcaption>
</figure>

In b5, instead of only using the predefined blocks, programmers can
easily build their own customized blocks, including variables,
functions, and objects, within the Factory panel, just like using the
default commands and functions to write a new _function_ or define a new
_object_ in a text-based language. A live preview of the customized
block is placed side by side with the mini code canvas where users can
add code blocks as they did in the main code canvas in Playground.

The Factory panel has three tabs in which users can construct three
types of customized blocks: _variable_, _function_, and _object_. The
_object_ type has not been implemented and the many details are yet to
be finalized. The _variable_ blocks do not take any inputs (all the
input nodes from the blocks used for construction will be eliminated)
and their output values are calculated once during their definition
before the first call to the Playground canvas and are fixed even when
the blocks are used for multiple times in the Playground canvas - just
like a variable. The whole _variable_ tab can be regarded as the _setup_
function in p5.js (Processing Foundation 2013), except that it also
produces instances that can be directly referred to in the _draw_ loop
(the Playground code canvas).

The _function_ tab, however, works like defining functions. The
customized blocks will not be called or calculated unless they are
placed in the code canvas in Playground and are able to take inputs to
calculate for different output values for each time different input
values are fed in - just like a function.

To avoid circular definition (the definition of a customized block has
itself in its defining canvas), the customized blocks can only be used
in the mega code canvas in Playground.

## Workshop

To test the usability of the system, we set up a workshop with three
participants (2 males, 1 female, all college students, 2 majoring in
design, and 1 majoring in psychology, labeled as P1 to P3) who had no
programming experience at all and did not know anything about b5 before.
The workshop was conducted in Chinese and used the English version of
the interface.

To get the participants to use the interface and program in b5, a
follow-along tutorial to build a bouncing ball sketch (a circle bouncing
around the canvas) was given. A few qualitative questions were asked and
discussed after the tutorial, including:

1.  How do you like b5? Are you interested in continuing learning it to
    build more complex programs in the future?

2.  Do you find the interface confusing? Is so, which parts confused
    you?

3.  Are you confident that you can build the example again by yourself
    from scratch without any external help and hint?

4.  Do you understand the core concepts of this programming language and
    its interface, including the Factory and Playground structure, the
    sequence, different block types, the nodes and their connecting
    wires? How would you explain them to people with no experience in b5
    and any other type of programming?

5.  Use one word to describe your thoughts on b5 and your experience.

We received a lot of positive feedback. Participants all agreed that b5
was easy to understand and use, with little difficulty comprehending the
basic ideas, including the structure and the sequential design. P1 said
that the interface made them believe that they can program, and coding
was no longer scary. Design students compared the interface to Adobe
Photoshop and Illustrator and agreed that the visual interface was more
intuitive to learn and work with as all the options, features, and
functionalities were visually available for reference and use. P3 said
that the system was user-friendly and could be a good alternative for
kids to learn programming or logical thinking in general. Other
endorsements were given to features including the translation (verbally
described to the participants) and embedded documentation. When asked to
use one word to describe their thoughts on b5 or the overall experience,
participants, from P1 to P3, used _fun_, _fast_, and _cute_.

Several concerns and suggestions were also brought up by the
participants in the workshop.

1.  The block names may be hard to memorize. Currently, there is no
    browsing system to view all the blocks in a well organized and
    classified way, and the only way to find and add a new block is to
    use a search bar to search for the name, type, or description of the
    block, which does require a basic knowledge of the existing blocks.

2.  Factory is confusing. One participant was confused by the Factory
    and Playground structure and could not understand their
    relationship, executing order, and differences and use cases between
    the _variable_ and _function_ sections. Extra explanation was needed
    for them to fully understand this concept.

3.  Sequence-sensitivity is not indicated by any means from the
    interface. One of the major differences of b5 and other visual
    programming languages is the execution sequence being determined
    solely based on the position instead of the connection of the
    blocks. However, no visual cue is currently provided to inform the
    users of this design. Programmers need to either be told or try to
    re-position several blocks to find it out, and possible confusion
    may occur during this process.

All the feedbacks listed above are valid concerns regarding b5 and the
current implementation of the programming environment and need to be
addressed in future iterations to provide a better user experience. To
better assess the acceptance rate, efficiency, learning curve, and
long-term benefit of using b5 as the primary learning tool for
beginners, more qualitative and quantitative analysis needs to be done.

## Limitations and Future Work

Several issues are to be addressed in the future. There is currently no
block browsing system for users to see all the blocks, organized and
classified, limiting the exploration for new users who have little
knowledge of the available blocks. The novel Factory and Playground
composition, as a graphical metaphor of the _definition - execution_
structure in traditional text-based programming languages, however,
needs a better design to inform the new users. The same as the
importance of block position in b5 and its relationship to the execution
order compared to other visual programming languages that more visual or
audio cues need to be provided as a part of the interface. Is the
current design and implementation optimized and understandable to
programming beginners? To answer this question, we need more qualitative
and quantitative analysis.

For the future works, two major pathways to extend the current work are:

1.  Sharing and collaboration. Sharing a well-wrapped block is much
    easier and visually more intuitive than sharing lines of code. A
    feature that enables users to share their customized blocks just
    like using Airdrop would greatly enhance current code sharing and
    collaboration experience. Users may also be able to browse the
    blocks designed and programmed by others in a marketplace and load
    then into their own projects easily.

2.  Modularization. b5 and its programming environment, the web editor,
    are initially designed for creative coding projects, while can also
    be modularized and extended to help non-programmers accomplish
    computational tasks in other domains, e.g., programming to customize
    and control smart home devices. As the blocks, in the backstage,
    have an extremely simple API for definition and execution, other
    developers and companies can use this system to create their own
    blocks to serve others needs in their domain of interest.

Community is also vital to the success, and many issues related to
building a lively and supportive community are yet to be explored, e.g.,
on-boarding new developers and outlining contribution guidelines and
code of conduct. These are not directly related to the design and
development of b5 itself, but would define the future of this new
programming platform.

## Conclusion

How will the next generation learn creative coding? Do they have to look
up hundreds of pages of documentation and take classes? Do they have to
write redundant code for features already well accomplished due to lack
of information? Do they have to learn English? We designed and
implemented a novel visual programming language, b5, and its web-based
programming environment to address these questions. The name of b5 was
inspired by p5.js (Processing Foundation 2013) developed by Processing
Foundation and developers from the open-source world, which also
inspired many other concepts from creating a canvas to the Factory and
Playground structure. b5 is a web-based visual programming language for
learning and fast prototyping for people with minimal to no programming
experience, leveraging many novel features compared to other visual
programming languages and text-based languages like Python: (1) b5 is
sequence-sensitive. There is only one possible global execution sequence
for all the code blocks determined by their relative positions in the
code canvas. The positions of the blocks play an essential role, just
like the order of the lines when programming using text-based languages,
and programmers are forced to think more about the sequence and flow.
(2) Instead of only using pre-defined blocks, users can also use those
blocks to design and construct their own customized blocks as new
_variables_, _functions_, or _objects_ and use them in the Playground
code canvas to increase the flexibility and efficiency of their
programs. The ability to define a function or wrap a group of commands
into one that saves typing and computing is critical to more advanced
programmers, and through this design and structure, a similar set of
skills are supposed to get trained. (3) Due to the sequence-sensitive
characteristic of b5, a new type of block, effect block, that affects
other blocks by relative positioning instead of wire connection, is
defined. The grid interface of the code canvas is also designed to help
dynamically reflect the effective range of those blocks. Effect blocks
reveal the underlying information, e.g., the drawing context settings,
that usually remain hidden to the programmers, and help them understand
the code better with this extra layer of information. The first two
features were inspired by text-based languages, while the last one may
help improve other visual and text-based languages to be more
understandable and less ambiguous.

In the workshop, our current implementation received positive feedback
from participants with no programming experience. All participants
agreed that this novel programming language and its editing interface
are easy to use and understand.

b5 rethinks the future of creative coding by emphasizing clarity,
accessibility, and customizability in a programming system. With
features including position-based sequential execution and customized
blocks, b5 helps non-programmers learn computational thinking and fast
prototype creative coding projects. While more analysis needs to be done
to assess its usability and efficiency, b5 has received various positive
feedback on its major innovation and novel features. The programming
language and its web-based environment will keep evolving and iterating
towards a functional tool that can be used for serious and critical
production works.

## Acknowledgments

This is the capstone research project in support of candidature for my
B.F.A. degree in Interactive Media Arts. This project is partially
funded by NYU Tisch School of the Arts Undergraduate Creative Research
Fund. After five years of undergraduate studies, this project well
represents many of the fields that I have learned, practiced, and tried:
industrial design, integrated innovation, computational design,
interactive media, computer science, and psychology. Many thanks to
everyone who has guided, helped, supported me, and shaped my academic
path towards the one that enables the accomplishment of this project: my
parents, professors, friends, and classmates. More specifically, I want
to say thank you to Tao Jiang, Yongjun Zeng, Xingqiong Chen, Keru Wang,
Daniel Shiffman, Daniel Rozin, Brandon Clifford, Xiangyang Xin, Denis
Pelli, Weiji Ma, David Robert Wallace, Lin Zou, Enguo Cao, Eugenio
Altieri, Yan Chen, Matt Romein, Katherine Dillon, Allison Parrish,
Youxin Wu, Shawn Van Every, Linghao Zhang, Mimi Yin, Randi Williams,
Arnav Kapur, Yiqing Liu, Wei Dai, Xintian Li, Zhongchao Tang, Xinyue
Wang, Yuanda Xu, Yanan Wang, Jin Dou, Glenn Fernandes, Cezar Mocan,
Lydia Jessup, Ruixuan Li, and Jinshuo Huang.

Thank you!

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-armoni2015scratch" class="csl-entry">

Armoni, Michal, Orni Meerbaum-Salant, and Mordechai Ben-Ari. 2015. “From
Scratch to ‘Real’ Programming.” _ACM Transactions on Computing Education
(TOCE)_ 14 (4): 1–15.

</div>

<div id="ref-boshernitsan2004visual" class="csl-entry">

Boshernitsan, Marat, and Michael Sean Downes. 2004. _Visual Programming
Languages: A Survey_. Computer Science Division, University of
California.

</div>

<div id="ref-burnett1995visual" class="csl-entry">

Burnett, Margaret M, and David W McIntyre. 1995. “Visual Programming.”
_COMPUTER-LOS ALAMITOS-_ 28: 14–14.

</div>

<div id="ref-cycling-74-2020" class="csl-entry">

Cycling ’74. 2020. “Max.” <https://cycling74.com/products/max/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-haeberli1988conman" class="csl-entry">

Haeberli, Paul E. 1988. “ConMan: A Visual Programming Language for
Interactive Graphics.” In _Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques_, 103–11.

</div>

<div id="ref-kovalkov2020inferring" class="csl-entry">

Kovalkov, Anastasia, Avi Segal, and Kobi Gal. 2020. “Inferring
Creativity in Visual Programming Environments.” In _Proceedings of the
Seventh ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale_, 269–72.

</div>

<div id="ref-lyons2001some" class="csl-entry">

Lyons, Paul, Giovanni Moretti, and Chrissy Reeves. 2001. “Some
Possibilities of Visual Programming Languages.” In _Proceedings of the
Symposium on Computer Human Interaction_, 43–47.

</div>

<div id="ref-maclaurin2011design" class="csl-entry">

MacLaurin, Matthew B. 2011. “The Design of Kodu: A Tiny Visual
Programming Language for Children on the Xbox 360.” In _Proceedings of
the 38th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of
Programming Languages_, 241–46.

</div>

<div id="ref-maloney2010scratch" class="csl-entry">

Maloney, John, Mitchel Resnick, Natalie Rusk, Brian Silverman, and
Evelyn Eastmond. 2010. “The Scratch Programming Language and
Environment.” _ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE)_ 10 (4):
1–15.

</div>

<div id="ref-meerbaum2011habits" class="csl-entry">

Meerbaum-Salant, Orni, Michal Armoni, and Mordechai Ben-Ari. 2011.
“Habits of Programming in Scratch.” In _Proceedings of the 16th Annual
Joint Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science
Education_, 168–72.

</div>

<div id="ref-monoskop-2012" class="csl-entry">

Monoskop. 2012. “Compos 68.” <https://monoskop.org/Compos_68>.

</div>

<div id="ref-processing-foundation-2013" class="csl-entry">

Processing Foundation. 2013. “<span class="nocase">p5.js</span>.”
<https://p5js.org/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-robert-mcneel-and-associates-2007" class="csl-entry">

Robert McNeel and associates. 2007. “Grasshopper.”
<https://grasshopper3d.com>.

</div>

<div id="ref-wikipedia-contributors-2007" class="csl-entry">

Wikipedia contributors. 2007. “<span class="nocase">Scratch (programming
language)</span>.”
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scratch_(programming_language)>.

</div>

<div id="ref-wikipedia-contributors-2021B" class="csl-entry">

———. 2021a. “<span class="nocase">Creative coding</span>.”
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_coding>.

</div>

<div id="ref-wikipedia-contributors-2021" class="csl-entry">

———. 2021b. “<span class="nocase">Visual programming language</span>.”
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_programming_language>.

</div>

</div>

## Appendix

### Code Availability

b5 is fully open-sourced.

The source code of the language and the web-based interface can be found
at <https://github.com/peilingjiang/b5>. The web editor is hosted at
<https://b5editor.app/> and is automatically built based on the latest
version of the code. Due to limited time, this version of the paper may
contain typos and errors and may be modified and updated in the future.
Future updates and more information about this project can be found at
the links above and <https://jpl.design/b5>.

### Early Sketches

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/sketch_1.png" alt="The early sketch of the interface, including the structure, code canvas, blocks, and wire connections." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The early sketch of the interface, including the structure, code canvas, blocks, and wire connections.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/sketch_2.png" alt="The early sketch of the block search interface." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The early sketch of the block search interface.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="/capstone/block_def.png" alt="The early block designs classified by the type and form." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The early block designs classified by the type and form.</figcaption>
</figure>
